docs: add a how-to guide about publishing a charm (#2420)
canonical/operator: docs/howto/publish-your-charm-on-charmhub.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: Publish your charm to Charmhub so that other people can deploy your charm. After you publish your charm, consider how to use tracks and channels appropriately.
---

(publish-your-charm)=
# How to publish your charm on Charmhub

Publishing your charm enables other people to deploy your charm with `juju deploy <charm-name>`. Anyone who knows your charm's name can also see the [Charmhub](https://charmhub.io/) page for your charm.

Before publishing your charm, review the `charmcraft.yaml` file to make sure you've provided appropriate metadata. The metadata controls what appears on the Charmhub page for your charm. See {external+charmcraft:ref}`Charmcraft | Configure package information <configure-package-information>`.

## Publish your charm

To publish your charm, follow the instructions in {external+charmcraft:ref}`Charmcraft | Publish a charm <publish-a-charm>`.

> If your charm depends on resources that are binary files, make sure to provide binaries for all the CPU architectures you intend to support.

Reviewer: I know this is moved from the old location, but perhaps this is an opportunity to clean up the duplication we have here? This instruction is both here and in [manage resources](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/charmcraft/latest/howto/manage-resources/#publish-a-resource) (where it's a best practice, so it also ends up in the list of best practices).

Maybe we should link to the manage resources page (probably starting at "publish a resource") from here? It does go hand-in-hand with publishing the charm itself.

Author: Good idea to link. I've gone with this:

> To publish your charm, follow the instructions in Charmcraft | Publish a charm.
>
> If your charm depends on resources, also follow the instructions in Charmcraft | Publish a resource.

## Manage tracks and channels

> Consider whether you need multiple "tracks" for your charm. By default, you'll have a track called `latest`, which is intended to correspond to the latest version of your charm's workload. It's common (although not required) to name the track after the workload version  instead.

Reviewer 2: 1. odd double space
2. some teams has switched from workload version to charm interface versions (observability), and I think some even allow workload version to be configured?

Reviewer: I wonder if there isn't yet an established best practice for track names, and also for whether upgrading a workload's major (minor?) version within a track is reasonable.

I thought [observability was using consecutive integers](https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/closing-the-latest-track-for-all-observability-charms/18054?u=tony-meyer), but maybe they moved from that already to an interface version? ([Grafana](https://charmhub.io/grafana-k8s) seems to still be consecutive integer, though).

IS Devops (PE) seem to use "latest" ([example](https://charmhub.io/traefik-k8s)).

TLS seem to use workload version (major.minor) ([example](https://charmhub.io/vault-k8s)).

Data platform seem to use workload version (major) ([example](https://charmhub.io/mongodb)).

Canonical K8s has "latest" but also workload version (major.minor) ([example](https://charmhub.io/coredns)).

Identity has "latest" ([example](https://charmhub.io/kratos)).

I'm not sure whether we (Charm Tech) has enough information to be making a recommendation. Maybe we should just say that some charms choose to have a numbered track instead of "latest"?

And for the paragraph below, I wonder if "you should" should be "you may choose to". Maybe also instead of "each version", "each major, or major.minor, version"

Author: Thanks for summarising the real picture! I've revised the doc:

> [...] Some charm developers choose to have a numbered track instead.
>
> If your charm supports multiple workload versions, consider maintaining a track for each major version or major.minor version. [...]

If your charm supports multiple workload versions, consider maintaining a track for each major version or major.minor version. See {external+charmcraft:ref}`Charmcraft | Manage tracks <manage-tracks>` after publishing your charm.

> Charmhub creates four "channels" within each track. By default, you'll have:

Reviewer 3: Are tracks and channels in Charmhub the same as Juju's?  

My initial understanding is that a channel is an identifier with the pattern `<track>/<risk>[/<branch>]` (from [Juju's charm channel](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/3.6/reference/charm/#charm-channel)). I can't shake off the feeling that `"channels" within each track` can give an impression that a "channel" is a "sub-category" of a track, which conflicts with Juju's documentation.

If my understanding is correct, may be we can reword this sentence to remove the "within" relationship.

Author: This is great point, thanks. I was thinking of a channel as being a sub-category of a track - but if anything is a sub-category, it's the risk level. The channel refers to the track + risk combo. How does this look?

> Charmhub creates four "channels":
>
> - `latest/stable`
> - `latest/candidate`
> - `latest/beta`
> - `latest/edge`
>
> These channels represent different risk levels for users of your charm.

Reviewer 3: It looks great. Thanks

- `latest/edge`
- `latest/beta`
- `latest/candidate`

> - `latest/stable`

Reviewer 2: both charmhub.io/X and `juju info X` sort this the other way around, with stable on top, and progressively less and less stable

Author: Good call, done, thanks

> These channels represent different risk levels for users of your charm. Users who deploy your charm from `latest/edge` typically expect to receive a new revision each time you push to your repository's main branch. Users who deploy from `latest/stable` typically expect a numbered release with release notes.

Reviewer: I would love it if this:

> Users who deploy from `latest/stable` typically expect a numbered release with release notes.

was what people actually got, but I'm not sure it's common enough to say that people expect this (unless perhaps we're saying this to push charmers to do it). From what I can see, the large, established, teams (for example: observability, data platform) do have release notes in their documentation. There are some others that have a changelog (probably close enough for this). There do seem to be quite a few that do not, though.

(As an aside: maybe release notes or a changelog should be a maturity indicator and requirement for public listing?)

"Numbered release" is more problematic, though. There will be a number - the revision - but that will be the case for any publish (or even multiple revisions in some cases, for the multiple architecture issue). I don't think it's right that you'd expect a (e.g.) "3.0" release of a charm. If it's not a numbered release of the charm but the workload, then it's still complicated because often that's a different track.

I think it would be better to focus on the risk aspect. Maybe something like:

```suggestion
These channels represent different risk levels for users of your charm. Users who deploy your charm from `latest/edge` typically expect to receive a new revision each time you push to your repository's main branch. Users who deploy from `latest/stable` expect a production-ready, extensively tested, safe release with release notes.
```

Author: I've gone with your suggested rewording, thanks

> To control which revision of your charm is available from each channel, follow the instructions in {external+charmcraft:ref}`Charmcraft | Manage revisions <manage-charm-revisions>`. You can also use Charmhub to manage revisions.

Reviewer: The last sentence gives me pause, because there's no link to docs that explain *how* you do this (which I think is because such docs do not exist), and it doesn't really explain it here either. Is it obvious enough when you log in to Charmhub how this is done?

Author: I must have been thinking about the snap store when I wrote this. I checked Charmhub and it doesn't look like I can promote revisions from the UI :confused: I've removed the sentence.
